Thomas Jefferson's most enduring legacy is the American Creed, the belief expressed in the second paragraph of the Declaration of Independence that declares "all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights." These sentiments have been the vision in the struggle to create an egalitarian, multiracial society in the United States. However, the author of this passage believed fervently that all persons of African descent should not be permitted to reside in the new republic unless they were enslaved. Throughout his life, Jefferson maintained that if freed, the former slaves must be colonized outside of North America to Africa or the Caribbean Islands. He based this imperative on his belief that the Blacks "are inferior to the whites in the endowments both of body and mind" (Jefferson, 1787/1954, p. 143).1 I will develop my analysis of Jefferson's racist thinking based primarily on his writings, and substantiate it with a summary of his political behavior with respect to slavery and freed slaves."Nature intended me for the tranquil pursuits of science by rendering them my supreme delight," he wrote in 1809 (Lipscomb & Bergh, 1905, Vol. XII, pp. 258-260),2 but a review of Jefferson's major published work, Notes on the State of Virginia (1787/1954), indicates that Jefferson was not rational and scientific when he wrote of the African-descended slaves in Virginia. His conclusion, developed in his book, that the slaves were inferior in body and mind resulted from thinking that was extremely emotional and illogical. His bias is especially obvious when compared to his own standards expressed in this same work. Jefferson, who considered himself among the enlightened persons of his time, broke with the prevailing Enlightenment thought when he speculated on the causes for what he believed was the innate inferiority of the Black race. In addition, soon after writing the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson participated in political activity that clearly indicated his unwavering belief that Blacks, if emancipated, must not live as freemen in Virginia. Lastly, a consummate political strategist, Jefferson did almost nothing to advance abolition during his 40 years in the turbulent political arena of Virginia and the new republic. The singular positive measure that he advocated in 1784to prevent slavery from flourishing in the new states of the northwest territory he diametrically opposed in 1820, when his desire to prevent the dissolution of the Union over the issue of the spread of slavery became more important for him than the curtailment of slavery.Jefferson wrote Notes on the State of Virginia (1787/1954) in response to a set of queries sent in late 1780 to influential members of the Continental Congress by the French legation at Philadelphia. The purpose of the queries was to inform French officials about the states in the new republic in North America. A copy was transmitted to Jefferson, then Governor of Virginia, who undertook the response for his state. A private printing of 200 copies was completed in France in 1785, and a public printing was made in 1787 (pp. xii, xvii, xix).The scope of the book is remarkable in its breadth. William Peden, in his introduction to the 1954 edition, states: Here are to be found his [Jefferson's] ideas concerning religious freedom or the separation of church and state, his analysis of the ideals of representative government versus dictatorship, his theories of art and education, his attitude concerning slavery and the Negro, his interest in science. (p. xi)The focus of this article will be on his attitude concerning slavery and Blacks. Jefferson's main discussion of race and slavery occurs in Query XIV on "Laws." He starts by describing a bill written by the Virginia Committee of Revisors, of which he was a member, to emancipate all slaves in Virginia (Jefferson, 1787/1954, pp. 137-138).The bill proposed a gradual plan of emancipation providing that all children of slaves born after the passage of the act would be emancipated in their infancy. These infants would be separated from their parents, and raised and educated at public expense until the females were 18 and the males were 21 years of age. At that time, they would be colonized at public expense to some place out- side of the United States, where they would be deemed a free and independent people. This bill was never submitted to the assembly because, as Jefferson later reported in his Autobiography (1829/1959), "the public mind would not yet bear this proposition, nor will it bear it even at this day [1821]" (p. 62). After describing the provisions of his emancipation plan, Jefferson followed with a rhetorical question: "Why not retain and incorporate the blacks into the state, and thus save the expense of supplying, by importation of white settlers, the vacancies they will leave?" His response was unequivocal; the freed slaves had to be removed from the country because of "deep rooted prejudices entertained by the whites; ten thousand recollections, by the blacks, of the injuries they have sustained; the real distinctions which nature has made; and many other circumstances which will divide us into two parties" (Jefferson, 1787/1954, pp. 137-138). In this response, Jefferson ascribed to both the Whites and Blacks living in Virginia feelings that he believed would prevent them from living peacefully together in freedom; but, more importantly, he added his belief of "the real distinctions which nature has made." As an enlightened person, Jefferson needed to view the differences between Whites and Blacks in a rational manner to uncover the real distinctions that he referred to, which he proceeded to do in Notes on the State of Virginia (1787/1954). I will compare the illogical arguments used by Jefferson in his remarks about Blacks in Notes on the State of Virginia with his rational thinking in similar situations not involving Blacks, which he included in this same book. Jefferson opened his comparison by commenting on the beauty of Whites and Blacks, and disparaging the latter because of the "immovable veil of black" and lack of flowing hair. He then stated that Black men favor White women over women of their own species as "uniformly as is the preference of Oran-ootans for the black women over those of their own species" (Jefferson, 1787/1954, p.138). This fiction must be measured against another statement Jefferson made in Notes on the State of Virginia, when he was discussing the Indians in the New World: "Of the Indian of South America, I know nothing; for I would not honor with the appellation of knowledge, what I derive from the fables published of them. These I believe to be just as true as the fables of Aesop" (p. 59). Jefferson had never visited Africa either, but he stated, without qualification, the fiction that sexually linked Black women in Africa to the jungle primates there. When later in Notes on the State of Virginia he speculated on the reasons for the innate inferiority of Blacks, he would again allude to this fable. Jefferson continued his comparison of the two races by citing a long list of physical and emotional differences between Blacks and Whites. His presentation was made in the style of reporting on scientific observations. These comparisons include the following: "They [blacks] secrete more by the glands of the skin and less by the kidneys which gives them a strong and disagreeable odor"; "They are more tolerant of heat and less of cold"; "They are at least as brave . . . but this may perhaps proceed from a want of fore- thought"; "Their griefs are transient"; and "Their existence appears to participate more of sensation than reflection" (1787/1954, p. 139). His conclusion was also couched in scientific terms: Comparing them by their faculties of memory, reason and imagination, it appears to me, that in memory they are equal to the whites; in reason much inferior, as I think one could scarcely be found capable of tracing and comprehending the investigations of Euclid; and that in imagination, they are dull, tasteless, and anomalous. (1787/1954, p. 139) Merrill Peterson, a well-regarded biographer of Thomas Jefferson, characterized these remarks as "thinly disguised folk beliefs about Negroes" (1970, p. 262). We shall learn below that Jefferson later admitted in his book that he had no empirical basis for these com- parisons; they were his subjective observations. Jefferson was, however, capable of objective analyses on other subjects. Under the Query on "Productions Mineral, Vegetable and Animal," Jefferson undertook a spirited defense against a charge made by the most renowned naturalist of his era, the Frenchman Count Buffon. Buffon (1807-1812) stated that animal and vegetable life in the New World, including the aboriginal people, was degenerate compared to Europe's because the prevailing weather in North America was cooler and more moist. Jefferson's lengthy response to Buffon was extremely rational, the work of a logical mind (1787/1954, pp. 47-58).3 In his defense of the Indians of the New World who Buffon included in his charge of degeneracy, Jefferson vigorously asserted that all differences between the North American Indians and the Europeans were a consequence of their situation; that is, the differences in their culture and environment. In this defense, he displayed great sensitivity to a people he had described in the Declaration of Independence as "the merciless Indian savages, whose known rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions."Toward the conclusion of his defense of the Indians, Jefferson wrote that "Before we condemn the Indians of this continent as wanting genius, we must consider that letters have not yet been introduced among them." He then asked a rhetorical question concerning the accomplishments of Northern Europeans when the Roman armies first crossed over the Alps: "How many good poets, how many able mathematicians, how many great inventors in arts and sciences, had Europe North of the Alps then produced? And it was sixteen centuries after this before a Newton could be formed" (1787/1954, p. 63). For the Indians, he believed it would be illogical to decry their lack of genius until they had sufficient time to develop a written language and to develop their intellects, perhaps 16 centuries. From among the enslaved Blacks in Virginia, he was pointedly critical that "one could scarcely be found capable of tracing and comprehending the investigations of Euclid."Continuing with his comparison of Whites and Blacks, Jefferson asserted that "We will consider them here, on the same stage with whites, and where the facts are not apocryphal on which a judgment is to be formed" (1787/1954, p. 139). Jefferson knew that Blacks and Whites were not on "the same stage" in Virginia. Almost all Blacks in Virginia were condemned to hereditary slavery, whereas the Whites were free men except for the indentured servants who labored under a fixed term of servitude. In his comparison of Whites and Blacks, Jefferson refused to consider the situation of the Blacks as he did with the Indians.I stated that Jefferson knew that Blacks and Whites were not on "the same stage" in Virginia because later in his book, while responding to the Query on "Manners," Jefferson revealed that he was aware of the effects of slavery on the enslaved. He wrote that "The whole commerce between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most boisterous passions, the most unremitting despotism on the one part, and degrading submissions on the other." Jefferson continued by writing that if a slave had a preference for a country in this world, it must be any other than that in which he is born to live and labor for another, "in which he must lock up the faculties of his nature" (1787/1954, pp. 162-163, emphasis added). He completely compartmentalized these sensitive observations from his comparison of the two groups described 20 pages earlier.Jefferson did make one exception to the condition of the slaves-he sought to explain the cause of their "disposition to theft" on their enslavement. His inspiration for this was the poet Homer, who wrote the following verse that Jefferson quoted in Notes on the State of Virginia (1787/1954): Jove fix'd it certain, that whatever dayMakes man a slave, takes half his worth away. (p. 142) Jefferson did not seem to comprehend in this passage that Homer's notion of worth was much broader than to drive an enslaved person to petty theft; rather, Homer intended it to describe the totality of an enslaved person's self-image and, consequently, his behavior.To complete his comparison of Whites with Blacks, Jefferson delved into ancient history. He compared New World slavery with Roman slavery, concluding that Roman slaves were treated more harshly. Despite their harsh condition, he observed that the Roman slaves were often the rarest of artists, the most learned of scientists, and the trusted tutors to their masters' children. Blacks, he believed, could not achieve such accomplishments. The superiority of Roman slaves over Black slaves was explainable, Jefferson concluded, because the Roman slaves were White, proving that race, not condition, made the difference (1787/1954, p. 142). He made no attempt to determine whether the Roman slaves who were artists, scientists, and tutors had been educated before their enslavement or were afforded an education while enslaved. Nor did hepoint out, as the historian Edward Gibbon (1776/1994) did, that although Roman slaves were the most abject part of that society, hope of emancipation was always present-and that when freed, the Roman slave could enter into society on a near-equal status with his former master (p. 68). This account was contained in Gibbon's first volume of The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire that was published in 1776, and which Jefferson, a voracious reader, very likely had read by the time he wrote Notes on the State of Virginia.Jefferson also wrote in Notes on the State of Virginia (1787/1954) that "The improvement of the blacks in body and mind, in the first instance of their mixture with the whites, has been observed by everyone, and proves that their inferiority is not the effect merely of their condition of life" (p. 141, emphasis added). In this book, he also summarily dismissed the accomplishments of two contemporary Black writers, Phyllis Wheatley and Ignatius Sancho. Of Wheatley, the African-born, American poet, Jefferson stated that "Religion indeed has produced a Phyllis Wheatley; but it could not produce a poet" (pp. 140, 288, fn. 11). As for Sancho, born on a slave ship and author of Letters, Jefferson stated that when compared with White writers, "we are compelled to enroll him at the bottom of the column" (pp. 140-141, 288, fn. 12).Nearing the end of his comparison of Whites and Blacks, Jefferson stated, "The opinion, that they [Blacks] are inferior in the faculties of reason and imagination, must be hazarded with great diffidence" (1787/1954, p. 143). He added that to justify a general conclusion requires many observations of a scientific nature that had not been undertaken in this study. He also confessed that "To our reproach it must be said that though for a century and a half we have had under our eyes the races of black and red men, they have never been viewed by us as subjects of natural history" (p. 143). One might expect that based on these admissions, Jefferson would forego a conclusion in his comparison of the races. This was not the case. Jefferson's conclusion on the race issue was tentative but chilling: "I advance it therefore as a suspicion only, that the blacks, whether originally a distinct race or made distinct by time and circumstance, are inferior to the whites in the endowments both of body and mind" (1787/1954, p. 143).This is in striking contrast to his conclusion stated in the Query entitled "Productions Mineral, Vegetable and Animal." In his response to this Query, Jefferson was delving into three hypotheses that had been postulated to explain how seashells had been deposited in the Andes Mountains 15,000 feet above the sea. He analyzed each of these hypotheses and found all were unsatisfactory to explain the phenomenon, concluding that "Ignorance is preferable to error; and he is less remote from the truth who believes nothing, than he who believes what is wrong" (1787/1954, p. 33). Jefferson postulated and published a hypothesis of the innate inferiority of Blacks compared to Whites that, by his own rational standards, the choice of silence would have been preferable. This is the essence of racial bias.Finally, Jefferson divulged in Notes on the State of Virginia (1787/1954) his political conclusions that emerged from his racial comparison. "This unfortunate difference of colour, and perhaps of faculty, is a powerful obstacle to the emancipation of these people." Secondly, he made these comments: "Among the Romans emancipation required but one effort. The slave, when made free, might mix, without staining the blood of his master. But with us a second is necessary, unknown to history. When freed, he is to be removed beyond the reach of mixture" (p. 143). These drastic cons especially the imperative for removal elsewhere, are based on what Jefferson termed "a suspicion only"; it is obvious that Jefferson entertained no doubts in his belief of Black inferiority.The removal of the emancipated Blacks from the United States was an imperative that Jefferson held for the remainder of his life. He expressed this imperative consistently over the intervening years. In 1821, 5 years before his death, Jefferson wrote in his Auto- biography (1829/1959) that "Nothing is more certainly written in the book of fate that these people [the slaves] are to be free, nor is it less certain that the two races, equally free, can not live in the same government" (p. 62). (The first phrase of this sentence is inscribed out of context on the rotunda of the Jefferson Memorial in Washington, DC.)Contrast his imperative for deportation of freed Blacks with his sentiments regarding the Indians. Jefferson wrote, "In truth, the ultimate point of rest and happiness for them [the Indians] is to let our settlements and theirs meet and blend together, to intermix and become one people" (Ford, 1904-1905, Vol. IX, p. 445).4 In an address to some Indians while he was president of the United States, he proclaimed, "You will mix with us by marriage, your blood will run in our veins, and will spread with us over this great island" (Lipscomb & Bergh, 1905, Vol. XVI, p. 452).5 He invited intermixture of Whites with Indians; intermixture of Whites with Blacks was Jefferson's great phobia.Jefferson based his suspicion of Black inferiority on one of two possibilities: Either Blacks were originally created a distinct species, or were made distinct by time and circumstance. In the former, Jefferson was in disagreement with the prevailing Enlightenment thought that was exemplified by the French naturalist, Count Buffon, with whose work he was very familiar (Jefferson, 1787/1954, p. 64).6 Jefferson was alluding to the Great Chain of Being that had become widely popularized when he wrote Notes on the State of Virginia (Jordan, 1968, p. 483). It was believed that all the species of animal life could be represented from the simplest to the most complex in a single hierarchy termed the Great Chain of Being, and that all of the races of humankind were of a single species located the eminence of this chain. Jefferson offered the possibility that Blacks on this chain were a separate species located beneath humans but above orang-ootans. Jefferson intimated this possibility when he reported on the fiction of this animal's mating with Black women, as interbreeding was regarded possible only within a species. That Blacks were below humans on the Great Chain of Being was a belief that Buffon fully discredited in his Natural History (1807-1812). Buffon wrote: From every circumstance may we obtain a proof, that mankind are not composed of species essentially different from each other; that, on the contrary, there was originally but one species, which, after being multiplied and diffused itself over the whole surface of the earth, underwent diverse changes from the influence of the climate, food, mode of living, epidemical disasters, and the intermixture of individuals more or less resembling each other. (Vol. IV, p. 351) Buffon also recorded in his work the accounts of a few travelers who had reported their observations of "Orang-outans" (Buffon's spelling) in their various natural habitats. Several of these travelers reported that these animals carried young girls of about 8 or 10 years old to the tops of high trees. Another traveler reported that these animals attempt to surprise the Negresses whom they retain for "enjoying," and another reported that these animals are passionately fond of women. Buffon presented these reports in his monumental work but did not comment on them. Later in this work, he reported on the anatomical differences between Orang-outans and humans that had been determined by dissection. He stated that the laboratory studies of this animal "neither bring it nearer the nature of man nor raise it above that of the brute." He concluded that this animal approaches nearer to man than other creatures but the interval of difference is not trifling (Vol. IX, pp. 149-177). Buffon approached this issue by stating the results of scientific observation and avoiding any conclusion on the issue of interspecies sexuality. His was the essence of enlightened thought; Jefferson's was not.Like most of the French intellectuals of his time, Buffon condemned slavery. Alluding to claims that Negroes could remain hardy with much less food and sleep than Europeans, thereby justifying their enslavement, he wrote, "How can men in whom the smallest sentiment of humanity remains, adopt such maxims, and on such shallow foundations attempt to justify excesses to which nothing could have given birth but the most sordid avarice?" (1807-1812, Vol. IV, p. 293). 